if you've been keeping up with
blockbusters these past couple of years
you probably recognize this image from
the afrofuturist spectacle black panther
which depicted an idealized
uncolonized vision of africa on a scale
never before
seen but black panther's director
ryan coogler has been subverting common
images of blackness amongst a white
dominated media on a quieter level for
years
whether it's reinventing long in the
tooth hollywood royalty
or rewriting stories about black victims
of state violence
from a personal perspective it all
starts
in the filmmaker's home of oakland
california
coogler's first work 2013's fruitvale
station
is a dramatized account of the murder of
oscar grant at the hands of police in
the film walks us through his last
seemingly ordinary day
his various get-togethers and solo
journeys to his neighborhood
up until and beyond the point of his
killing almost entirely from his
perspective
[Music]
coogler's next work found the filmmaker
on a bigger stage
with the 2015 sports drama creed a
spin-off of the beloved and long-running
rocky franchise
[Applause]
[Music]
instead of the famed italian stallion
the film instead focuses on the young
up-and-comer
adonis johnson the child of rocky's faux
turned sidekick
apollo creed
[Music]
poogle's most recent and most famous
work is black panther
somehow the first out of around 20 films
in the marvel cinematic universe to have
a black lead
what are you talking about set primarily
in the fictional african utopia of
wakanda
a place untouched by white colonialists
the film follows the struggle of
t'challa
played by the late and great chadwick
boseman as he becomes the revered king
[Applause]
soon he ends up having to deal with his
country's buried sins
and the consequences of their isolation
from the world while reckoning with his
father's legacy
a billion dollar grossing marvel
blockbuster a low-key
sundance film festival favorite and a
reinvention of a classic sports
franchise
might seem like vastly different films
on the surface
but look closely and you can trace the
stylistic and thematic connections that
reveal
ryan coogler's distinctive vision as a
filmmaker
from insightful examinations of black
masculinity
to grand rewrites of black history on
the big screen
[Music]
coogless films come from a long
tradition of black american cinema
his works are made in the mould of
movements such as the la rebellion
which explored black interiority and
community
in a more inclusive alternative to
hollywood cinema
key to all of cootler's work are his
actor collaborators
michael b jordan who first turned heads
in the hbo series the wire this is mia
would become the focal point of much of
coogler's filmography
his vulnerability volatile performances
and multifaceted frustration
all essential pieces of the filmmaker's
depictions of black masculinity
i had accident work it all starts with
fruitvale station
jordan's performance of oscar is
sensitive but angry
and continually frustrated by the
numerous roadblocks in his path to
self-improvement
i like you man but i can't even do this
job bro
you want me selling dope bro oscar you
need me outside waiting for you to get
done brad
take care of yourself
michael b jordan is now famous for his
ability to keep anguish and
vulnerability
at the center of his character's
outbursts of rage
this carried over to his character
adonis in creed
whose relationships with his girlfriend
bianca and his mentor rocky
are equally tender in different ways get
your hands off me oh man
get your sick ass out of here
who could have known that adonis would
turn out looking the way he did
but the name is clearly appropriate
kugler and jordan emphasize his muscular
form
not just as something desirable but also
as a kind of armor
as though adonis has literally crafted
his body into a defense
against further pain this element
carried through to his performance in
black panther
as the antagonistic killmonger jordan's
body is decorated with self-scarring for
every kill that he's made
disguising his vulnerability more
showmanship to match his braggadocio
performance
however black panther showed a slight
shift in coogler's exploration of black
masculinity
through bozeman's regal performance of
king t'challa
how are you feeling today
the weight of legacy lies upon t'challa
killmonger and
adonis creed but where jordan's
characters attempt to leverage authority
through raw
strength bozeman's project a different
kind of authority
we let the fear of our discovery stop us
from doing what is right
no more as t'challa boseman was charming
and graceful
and allowed a very real human
vulnerability to show for one of
marvel's most famously stoic
characters this wasn't just because of
his own charisma
but the generosity in his performance
helping his co-stars to shine in every
scene he's with them in
if you are not so stubborn you would
make a great queen i would make a great
queen because i am so stubborn
if that's what i wanted
he will be missed
despite being one of the most successful
filmmakers working today
coogler doesn't hog the limelight
instead
he surrounds himself with a
constellation of talented collaborators
both in front of and behind the camera
often to award winning effect
in fruitvale station cinematographer
rachel morrison shoots an intimate
handheld super 16 observing oscar's life
from the same perspective
as his family
while in creed's much talked about
single take fight between adonis creed
and leo sparino
cinematographer maurice alberti's
elaborate camera work
swoops around the two fighters showing
off both the building fatigue
and tactical battle of boxing
[Music]
the prowling camera work and patient
long take fights
returned for black panther kugler
keeping the shot locked onto characters
for just
a little longer than one might expect
for a little extra umph
[Music]
black panther's oscar-winning production
design costumes and soundtrack are
utterly essential in building the
identity
of wakanda's afrofuturist aesthetic
hannah beechler's sets offer a unique
blend
of modernist design and traditional
african adornments and patterns
that carries through to ludwig
gorinson's score which mixes the
traditional action score with african
flourishes
ruth carter's costume design is built
around a mixture of real african tribal
textures
from the vivid red patterns of the
kenyan masai people to the neck rings of
the underbelly women of south africa
both evident in the costumes of the
royal guard the dora melanche
this headdress worn by angela bassett's
character ramonda is taken from
traditional zulu wedding wear for the
blankets worn by wakabi
played by daniel kaluya is the wakandan
take on a lesotho blanket
which means it also doubles as a weapon
across all three of these films coogler
has populated his productions with an
array of talent
that in most cases have worked with him
since his first film
no matter how big the stage gets those
connections continue to matter
but even if you didn't know anything
about the talent behind the scenes in
coogler's work
you only need to watch his films to see
that what ties them together
is his rewriting of the way black
stories are told
this all started with fruitvale station
which is a rewriting of how black
victims are framed within the us media
it engages with the tragedy on a
personal level portraying oscar grant
simply as a man
not sanctified or demonized in the wake
of its killing
[Applause]
creed's grand rewrite is that of
hollywood mythology
it re-contextualizes a long-running
franchise through a new
cultural lens rocky was a champion of
the collective white imagination
created in an age where black boxes were
dominating in his bracket
and so along came the stallone film with
the white man casts the plucky
working-class underdog
against the wealthy showboating apollo
creed
[Applause]
what creed does is recenter the
narrative on the figure of the black
boxer
as rocky takes a supportive role and
apollo that of heroic and even spiritual
figure
and hands the reigns of the franchise to
his son adonis
who even gets to claim the role of
scrappy underdog as well as the rocky
theme
for himself
[Music]
on a superficial level coogler's creed
isn't revolutionary
it still sticks to the tried tested and
beloved traditions
of the franchise and sports movies right
down to its indulgence in more than a
couple of training montages
where it is revolutionary is as simple
as that it's the boxing movie as
viewed through black culture with
moments specific to black experience
permeating the entire film chief among
nose is one of the film's quietest
moments
a tender sequence between adonis and his
girlfriend bianca has him casually
braiding her hair
the camera lingering on the long twists
[Music]
creed isn't so much a reinvention of the
boxing movie
as it is a loving revisitation of the
classic joys of the sports movie through
the eyes of a black protagonist
something that feels quietly
revolutionary in its own right
[Music]
with black panther kugler stages a grand
rewrite of colonialism itself with its
afrofuturist touches
and a cast almost entirely comprised of
black actors from a variety of
backgrounds
he's probably the filmmaker to come
closest to finally breaking the mould of
marvel's white
western house style
wakanda is a fantasy of africa untouched
by colonialism and imperial greed
protected by its isolationism and
secrecy and allowed to flourish under
its own identity
the sheen of skyscrapers co-existing
with more traditional african buildings
and patterns
we are home kugler mixes in just enough
elements of the real africa
to make wakanda feel lived in such as
having the cast
frequently speak in the popular southern
african language corsa
and filtering its english language
banter through pan-african accents
i can't wait to see what kind of update
you make to your ceremony or outfits
[Music]
as the late great chadwick boseman put
it to have anything else
would be to colonize wakanda
[Music]
unlike most marvel movies coogler
connects the movie to his own home and
experiences
by bookending it with familiar scenes
set in oakland
and relating the uniquely
african-american feeling
of being stranded in the united states
[Music]
by ending black panther in oakland mere
miles from the setting of fruitvale
station
cooler brings not just the film but his
filmography so far
full circle at the same time he locates
something so personal and down to earth
within the biggest possible blockbuster
[Music]
no matter how big the stage is or how
ambitious
accomplished and phenomenally successful
these hollywood projects have become
these films are undeniably the work of
ryan coogler
in the end it all comes down to his home
his people
and their stories
you